Adding basic Electrolyzer unit model (#1006)
watertap-org/watertap: docs/technical_reference/unit_models/electrolyzer.rst

Electrolyzer
============
.. note::

  The development of the electrolyzer model is ongoing.

This is a simplified electrolyzer unit model used to approximate electrolysis performance.  With the current build, the model is simulated under the following assumptions:

>    * simulation of this unit model is only supported with the Multi-Component Aqueous Solution (MCAS) property package

Reviewer: Would be convenient and helpful for the user to provide a hyperlink to MCAS documentation here

>    * supports liquid phase only, vapor components are modeled in the liquid phase

Reviewer 2: Recommend deleting "vapor comp are... liquid phase".  By physical chemistry language, when gas molecules are in a liquid phase, they are solutes like others.  When speaking of "gas phase",  it means a matter condition with uniform physical properties.  The second half of the sentence may unnecessarily confuse about what is "gas components" referring to (phase or molecules).

Author: I understand the concern here, revised to "vapor-liquid phase equilibrium is not calculated." Trying to figure the best shorthand way to describe that Cl2 (v.) (gas molecule in vapor phase) and Cl2 (aq.) (dissolved gas molecule in aqueous phase) are indistinguishable in the current state and exist only in the `['Liq']` index

   * supports steady-state only

>    * assumes isothermal conditions and performance is not temperature dependent

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   * assumes isothermal conditions and performance is not temperature-dependent
```

.. currentmodule:: watertap.unit_models.electrolyzer

Introduction
------------
This model was primarily motivated to simulate the chlor-alkali membrane electrolysis process, a conventional electrolyzer for the production of chlorine gas and hydroxide (Bommaraju, 2015) (Kent, 2007). The model has been demonstrated for the chlor-alkali configuration in the electrolyzer testing file and may be generalizable to other electrolysis mechanisms, but has not been validated for generalized processes.

Given a membrane electrolyzer, the catholyte and anolyte are separated by an ion exchange membrane. This provides two distinct control volumes to perform model calculations. The basis for determining electrolyzer performance is accounting for the Faradaic conversion of species with respect to the electrolysis reactions at the cathode and anode. Faradaic conversion considers equating the supplied electrical current to the amount of electrons available for electrochemical reaction by Faraday's law. The calculation of Faradaic conversion is described in "electrons passed between anode and cathode contributing to reactions" found in the :ref:`Equations <electrolyzer_equations>`.

> 

Reviewer 2: "Faraday's law" is also known as the basic electromagnetism law where induction is related to magnetic flux, although I can tell what it refers to here.  Maybe point it to some equation for clarity.

Author: Clarified to Faraday's law of electrolysis to differentiate from the Faraday's law of electromagnetism, and added this clarification to the corresponding equation in the equation section.

Degrees of Freedom
------------------
For a given electrolyzer design, there are 8 degrees of freedom in addition to the inlet state variables (i.e., temperature, pressure, component flowrates) that should be fixed for the model to be fully specified. In typical design cases the following 8 variables are fixed:

   * membrane current density, :math:`i_{mem}`
   * anode current density, :math:`i_{ano}`
   * anode overpotential, :math:`\eta_{ano}`
   * cathode current density, :math:`i_{cat}`
   * cathode overpotential, :math:`\eta_{cat}`
   * current, :math:`I`
   * current efficiency, :math:`\theta_{current}`
   * voltage efficiency, :math:`\theta_{voltage}` *or* resistance, :math:`R`

> 

Reviewer 2: I think there are redundant "efficiency" parameters here (considering they are all fixed so the redundancy is likely neglected).  Try clarify what is each efficiency accounting for?  For example, the current efficiency may account for all "side" electron consumption except desired electrolysis; this makes sense to parameterize since the model is not writing those side effects out.  However, for the voltage, you have already written out over potentials, ohmic potential drops, and thermo potential (you'll probably need a membrane potential"; with these you've already parameterized all "side" potential drops and what is the efficiency for?

Author: @lbibl This is a good catch. It should be unnecessary given the new addition of `eq_voltage_cell`. The only value to this is if a user doesn't know the anode and cathode overpotentials and/or the resistance. Then a 'redundant' equation can replace

```
b.voltage_cell == (
                b.voltage_reversible
                + b.anode_overpotential
                + b.cathode_overpotential
                + b.current * b.resistance
            )
```
with
```
b.voltage_reversible == b.voltage_cell * b.efficiency_voltage
```
where 
```
b.efficiency_voltage = (
                + b.anode_overpotential
                + b.cathode_overpotential
                + b.current * b.resistance
)
```
but wants to be assumed at a single value because the individual values are unknown. Good for general analysis of low fidelity models.

Do you think this should just be removed or added as a config option?

Author: @avdudchenko also could use some input based on the intended analysis around the model

Reviewer 2: I recommend removing the voltage efficiency.

Additionally, the electrolysis reactions at the anode and cathode must be specified with stoichiometry and electrochemical potential (Phillips, 2017). By default, the following stoichiometric variables will be fixed to 0 when the electrolyzer model block is constructed. Therefore, only the nonzero stoichiometry must be additionally specified. As an example for the chlor-alkali process, the following reactions occur with sodium ions permeating from the anolyte to catholyte. The stoichiometry is normalized to 1 mole of electrons as intended in the model framework.

Anode:

    .. math::

        & Cl^-\to{\small\frac{1}{2}}Cl_2+e^-\hspace{4em}E=1.21V \\\\

Cathode:

    .. math::

        & H_2O+e^-\to{\small\frac{1}{2}}H_2+OH^-\hspace{4em}E=-0.99V \\\\

The following variables should then be fixed:

.. code-block::

   # membrane properties
   m.fs.electrolyzer.membrane_ion_transport_number["Liq", "NA+"].fix(1)

> 

Reviewer 2: If all ions are given a t_mem, those of anions should be fixed at 0.

Author: Yes, all variables not overwritten with a nonzero value are fixed to zero within the build of the model.

Reviewer 2: Make sure this is documented if it hasn't been.

   # anode properties
   # Cl- --> 0.5 Cl2 + e-

>    m.fs.electrolyzer.anode_electrochem_potential.fix(1.21)

Reviewer 2: Are these thermo potential used anywhere?  There is no Nernst equation to account for the thermo simulation.

Author: No temperature dependence is included in this first model, basically assuming all input parameters are fixed at the operating temperature and the operating temperature is held constant.

Reviewer 2: So I guess what I called "thermo potential" is the "electrochemical potential here.  I think a better name should be standard reduction potential.   I am not sure if it is a good idea to separate two over potentials if this is supposed to be a simpler basic model. They are somewhat redundant variables if taking arbitrary values.  But not a technical mistake as well.

Author: I believe I've seen the same value also named electromotive force potential and electric potential, so I think any of the above are okay. So long as it's clear on what to input, which these values are established for this reaction within marginal deviations.

Also I kept them separate because technically the reactions in the anolyte and catholyte are determined by what the stoichiometry inputs are. Therefore, if a different reaction is occurring on the anode, then it is clear that the cathode potential is still the same, although the anode and overall are now different.

   m.fs.electrolyzer.anode_stoich["Liq", "CL-"].fix(-1)
   m.fs.electrolyzer.anode_stoich["Liq", "CL2-v"].fix(0.5)

   # cathode properties
   # H20 + e- --> 0.5 H2 + OH-
   m.fs.electrolyzer.cathode_electrochem_potential.fix(-0.99)
   m.fs.electrolyzer.cathode_stoich["Liq", "H2O"].fix(-1)
   m.fs.electrolyzer.cathode_stoich["Liq", "H2-v"].fix(0.5)
   m.fs.electrolyzer.cathode_stoich["Liq", "OH-"].fix(1)

Model Structure
------------------
The electrolyzer model consists of 2 ``ControlVolume0DBlocks``, one for the anolyte and another for the catholyte. Currently, the generation of species via electrolysis reactions is handled by the ``custom_molar_term`` within the ``ControlVolume0DBlock``. Coupling this custom molar term with the Faradaic conversion, the material balance may be written by the following and calculated within the ``ControlVolume0DBlock``. Here, membrane flux is handled by relating the stoichiometric coefficient required to satisfy the charge balance. The direction of membrane flow is calculated from anode to cathode in the unit model, lending to the signage of the membrane stoichiometric coefficient shown.

> 

Reviewer 2: These language isn't quite convention electrochemical statement and a little hard to get by me. For example, membrane flux of what component? what is "stoichiometric coefficient required to satisfy the charge balance."? what is "membrane flow"?       Some overall suggestions are 1) in a single model, you should have one unified flux direction and assign it to be positive, 2) be very careful with the current direction, which may be the same or opposite to the flux direction depending on the charge carrier's +/-; 3) herein you may simply state the stoich coef. is for the mass change on the electrode surface and the t_mem is for the mass transfer across the membrane.

Anode:

    .. math::

        & \dot{n}_{in,j}-\dot{n}_{out,j}+\frac{\left(\varepsilon_{ano,j}-t_{mem,j}\right)I\theta_{current}}{F}=0 \\\\

Cathode:

    .. math::

        & \dot{n}_{in,j}-\dot{n}_{out,j}+\frac{\left(\varepsilon_{cat,j}+t_{mem,j}\right)I\theta_{current}}{F}=0 \\\\

> 

Reviewer 2: The last comment covers through these lines.

>         & \dot{n}_{in,j}-\dot{n}_{out,j}+\frac{\left(\varepsilon_{cat,j}+\varepsilon_{mem,j}\right)I\theta_{current}}{F}=0 \\\\

Reviewer 3: \varepsilon_{mem,j} is missing from the nomenclature/variables definition

   "electrons contributing to electrolysis reactions", ":math:`\dot{n}_{e^-}`", "electron_flow", "None", ":math:`\frac{mol}{s}`"
   "current efficiency", ":math:`\theta_{current}`", "efficiency_current", "None", ":math:`\text{dimensionless}`"
   "voltage efficiency", ":math:`\theta_{voltage}`", "efficiency_voltage", "None", ":math:`\text{dimensionless}`"
   "power efficiency", ":math:`\theta_{power}`", "efficiency_power", "None", ":math:`\text{dimensionless}`"
   "molar flow of species j across the membrane from anolyte to catholyte", ":math:`\dot{n}_{mem,j}`", "mass_transfer_term", "[t, p, j]", ":math:`\frac{mol}{s}`"
   "molar generation of species j by electrolysis at the anode", ":math:`\dot{n}_{ano,j}`", "custom_reaction_anode", "[t, j]", ":math:`\frac{mol}{s}`"
   "molar generation of species j by electrolysis at the cathode", ":math:`\dot{n}_{cat,j}`", "custom_reaction_cathode", "[t, j]", ":math:`\frac{mol}{s}`"

| :math:`^a` Variable intended to be move to a interchangeable component block, callable to the base electrolyzer model
| :math:`^b` Value is normalized to 1 electron in electrolysis stoichiometry

> For non-fixed efficiencies, electrochemical potentials, and other relevant variables, custom constraints  may be constructed at the flowsheet level. These may allow for predicative performance as a function of temperature, concentration, overpotential, and other variables.

Reviewer 3: you mean predictive performance.

.. _electrolyzer_equations:

Equations
-----------
.. csv-table::
   :header: "Description", "Equation"

   "membrane current density", ":math:`I = i_{mem}A_{mem}`"

>    "ion permeation through the membrane", ":math:`\dot{n}_{mem,j} = -t_{mem,j}\dot{n}_{e^-}`"

Reviewer 2: I haven't read through the codes in detail.  But I think this equation overlaps the mass balance eq, where you've considered the flux across membrane as the mass_transfer term I assume.

Author: Overlaps isn't necessarily correct, but my reasoning is that, there technically is no variable constructed for a few variables at the unit model level. Rather, they are calculated by a variable within the control volume. I don't think we have a convention for these cases, so here I denote a _n_ as a flow rate term, but it matches the `mass_transfer_term`. However since `mass_transfer_term` is not exclusively membrane transfer, I think it may also be confusing to use some universal symbol as such.

I think this is a matter of is the documentation used to help users understand the model at the surface, or should it explain line by line and discuss every touched function, i.e., `ControlVolume0D` usage, or not. I'm going to make some changes based on your comments here once I figure out how to present it with more clarity. Open to suggestions.

Reviewer 2: If the electron flow serving as a intermediate variable is what you meant, it's technically ok.  I am not sure about this statement "mass_transfer_term is not exclusively membrane transfer"- so if your control vol is 3-D, membrane in 2-d is not in your c.v.. The mass_transfer_term of the c.v.  is exactly the membrane transfer because it is a 2-d flux in this case.

Reviewer: I am realizing now that other unit models are also missing this, but I think it'd be beneficial to include the constraint name as a column for the table for users to more easily compare the documentation with model code (similar to how we provide variable_name in the variables table).

Author: @adam-a-a I would say maybe make it an issue. I don't want to change it here and be inconsistent with all other documentation. If this were to become a convention across unit models, maybe it would be best to have a helper function or harness to start these tables, and then we can do it for all unit models instead of this one.

Reviewer: @hunterbarber sounds completely reasonable. I had some sort of helper function to do this for all our zero-order models, and there is a module in IDAES that could be used to display expressions in latex, if we wanted to go a step further.

   "membrane unit cost", ":math:`c_{membrane}`", "membrane_unit_cost", "25", ":math:`\frac{$}{m^2}`"
   "anode unit cost", ":math:`c_{anode}`", "anode_unit_cost", "300", ":math:`\frac{$}{m^2}`"
   "cathode unit cost", ":math:`c_{cathode}`", "cathode_unit_cost", "600", ":math:`\frac{$}{m^2}`"
   "membrane, anode, and cathode fraction of total capital", ":math:`f_{material}`", "fraction_material_cost", "0.65", ":math:`\text{dimensionless}`"

The following variables are constructed when applying the electrolyzer costing method in the ``watertap_costing_package``:

.. csv-table::
   :header: "Description", "Symbol", "Variable Name", "Units"

   "membrane capital cost", ":math:`C_{membrane}`", "membrane_cost", ":math:`$`"
   "anode capital cost", ":math:`C_{anode}`", "anode_cost", ":math:`$`"
   "cathode capital cost", ":math:`C_{cathode}`", "cathode_cost", ":math:`$`"
   "membrane replacement cost", ":math:`C_{memreplace}`", "membrane_replacement_cost", ":math:`\frac{$}{yr}`"

Capital Cost Calculations
+++++++++++++++++++++++++

> Capital costs are contributing to the majority of material costs for the anode cathode and membrane. Each material cost is calculated individually then summed (O’Brien, 2005).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Capital costs contribute to the majority of material costs for the anode cathode and membrane. Each material cost is calculated individually then summed (O’Brien, 2005).
```

    .. math::

        & C_{membrane} = c_{membrane}A_{membrane} \\\\
        & C_{anode} = c_{anode}A_{anode} \\\\
        & C_{cathode} = c_{cathode}A_{cathode} \\\\
        & C_{cap,total} = \frac{C_{membrane}+C_{anode}+C_{cathode}}{f_{memreplace}}

Operating Cost Calculations
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++

> Operating costs for the electrolyzer are the electricity requirements and membrane replacement costs. Electricity is costed using ``cost_flow`` applied to the ``power`` variable on the unit model. Currently, replacement costs for the anode and cathode are not considered in the costing function.

Reviewer: Thinking about this a little more, if we cost the flow by power, which I presume is in `kW`, would this be accurate if we were to encounter a non-hourly timescale? What I mean is, at an hourly temporal resolution, power (kW) and energy (kWh) would match, but that wouldn't hold true at other temporal scales.
